[[acknowledgments]]
=== Acknowledgments

This book took four times longer to write than I thought it would, and
for much of that time felt rather like a grand piano suspended above my
head wherever I went. Without help from many people, I would not have
been able to complete it while staying sane.

Andy Oram, my editor at O'Reilly, was a writer's dream. Aside from
knowing the field intimately (he suggested many of the topics), he has
the rare gift of knowing what one meant to say and helping one find the
right way to say it. It has been an honor to work with him. Thanks also
to Chuck Toporek for steering this proposal to Andy right away.

Brian Fitzpatrick reviewed almost all of the material as I wrote it,
which not only made the book better, but kept me writing when I wanted
to be anywhere in the world but in front of the computer. Ben
Collins-Sussman and Mike Pilato also checked up on progress, and were
always happy to discuss—sometimes at length—whatever topic I was trying
to cover that week. They also noticed when I slowed down, and gently
nagged when necessary. Thanks, guys.

Biella Coleman was writing her dissertation at the same time I was
writing this book. She knows what it means to sit down and write every
day, and provided an inspiring example as well as a sympathetic ear. She
also has a fascinating anthropologist's-eye view of the free software
movement, giving both ideas and references that I was able use in the
book. Alex Golub—another anthropologist with one foot in the free
software world, and also finishing his dissertation at the same time—was
exceptionally supportive early on, which helped a great deal.

Micah Anderson somehow never seemed too oppressed by his own writing
gig, which was inspiring in a sick, envy-generating sort of way, but he
was ever ready with friendship, conversation, and (on at least one
occasion) technical support. Thanks, Micah!

Jon Trowbridge and Sander Striker gave both encouragement and concrete
help—their broad experience in free software provided material I
couldn't have gotten any other way.

Thanks to Greg Stein not only for friendship and well-timed
encouragement, but for showing the Subversion project how important
regular code review is in building a programming community. Thanks also
to Brian Behlendorf, who tactfully drummed into our heads the importance
of having discussions publicly; I hope that principle is reflected
throughout this book.

Thanks to Benjamin "Mako" Hill and Seth Schoen, for various
conversations about free software and its politics; to Zack Urlocker and
Louis Suarez-Potts for taking time out of their busy schedules to be
interviewed; to Shane on the Slashcode list for allowing his post to be
quoted; and to Haggen So for his enormously helpful comparison of canned
hosting sites.

Thanks to Alla Dekhtyar, Polina, and Sonya for their unflagging and
patient encouragement. I'm very glad that I will no longer have to end
(or rather, try unsuccessfully to end) our evenings early to go home and
work on "The Book."

Thanks to Jack Repenning for friendship, conversation, and a stubborn
refusal to ever accept an easy wrong analysis when a harder right one is
available. I hope that some of his long experience with both software
development and the software industry rubbed off on this book.

CollabNet was exceptionally generous in allowing me a flexible schedule
to write, and didn't complain when it went on far longer than originally
planned. I don't know all the intricacies of how management arrives at
such decisions, but I suspect Sandhya Klute, and later Mahesh Murthy,
had something to do with it—my thanks to them both.

The entire Subversion development team has been an inspiration for the
past five years, and much of what is in this book I learned from working
with them. I won't thank them all by name here, because there are too
many, but I implore any reader who runs into a Subversion committer to
immediately buy that committer the drink of his choice—I certainly plan
to.

Many times I ranted to Rachel Scollon about the state of the book; she
was always willing to listen, and somehow managed to make the problems
seem smaller than before we talked. That helped a lot—thanks.

Thanks (again) to Noel Taylor, who must surely have wondered why I
wanted to write another book given how much I complained the last time,
but whose friendship and leadership of Golosá helped keep music and good
fellowship in my life even in the busiest times. Thanks also to Matthew
Dean and Dorothea Samtleben, friends and long-suffering musical
partners, who were very understanding as my excuses for not practicing
piled up. Megan Jennings was constantly supportive, and genuinely
interested in the topic even though it was unfamiliar to her—a great
tonic for an insecure writer. Thanks, pal!

I had four knowledgeable and diligent reviewers for this book: Yoav
Shapira, Andrew Stellman, Davanum Srinivas, and Ben Hyde. If I had been
able to incorporate all of their excellent suggestions, this would be a
better book. As it was, time constraints forced me to pick and choose,
but the improvements were still significant. Any errors that remain are
entirely my own.

My parents, Frances and Henry, were wonderfully supportive as always,
and as this book is less technical than the previous one, I hope they'll
find it somewhat more readable.

Finally, I would like to thank the dedicatees, Karen Underhill and Jim
Blandy. Karen's friendship and understanding have meant everything to
me, not only during the writing of this book but for the last seven
years. I simply would not have finished without her help. Likewise for
Jim, a true friend and a hacker's hacker, who first taught me about free
software, much as a bird might teach an airplane about flying.
