Fewer than 10 percent of free software projects take hold and achieve
lasting success. The advice in this book will improve your project's
chances of being one of them.

<em>Producing Open Source Software</em>, written by long-time
developer and manager Karl Fogel, covers many of the problems that
arise in open source software development.  Perhaps you are a
programmer whose small project has caught on but now needs to grow,
or has already grown to the point where you're having trouble managing
it.  Perhaps you're having trouble motivating contributors, or are
experiencing too much turnover. Maybe you inherited a project and are
wondering how to keep it going, or have a proprietary project you'd
like to make open.

Topics in <em>Producing Open Source Software</em> include:

* The technical resources free software projects need to provide to
  developers and users

* Keeping developers productive, cooperative, and happy

* Handling communications efficiently

* Distributing responsibility for bug tracking and fixing

* Funding projects effectively

* Testing and releasing

Fogel has worked with the development teams of many free software
projects, including CVS and GNU Emacs, and most recently managed the
creation of Subversion for CollabNet, Inc.

This book is released under a Creative Commons Attibution-ShareAlike
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/). The full
text is available online at http://www.producingoss.com/.

Author Biography
================

In 1995, Karl Fogel co-founded Cyclic Software, a company offering
commercial CVS support.  In 1999 he added support for CVS anonymous
read-only repository access, inaugurating a new standard for access to
development sources in open source projects.  That same year, he wrote
"Open Source Development With CVS" (published by Coriolis), now in its
third edition via Paraglyph Press.

Since early 2000, he has worked for CollabNet, Inc, managing the
creation and development of Subversion, a version control system
written from scratch by CollabNet and a team of open source
volunteers, and meant to replace CVS as the de facto standard among
open source projects.  He also participates in various other open
source projects as a module maintainer, patch contributor, and
documentation writer.
